Eating Disorders: What You Need to Know

Download PDF

En español

What are eating disorders?

Eating disorders are serious illnesses marked by severe disturbances to one's eating behaviors. Although many people may be concerned about their health, weight, or appearance from time to time, some people become fixated or obsessed with weight loss, body weight or shape, and controlling their food intake. These may be signs of an eating disorder.
Eating disorders are not a choice. These disorders can adversely affect a person's physical and mental health, and in some cases, they can be life-threatening. With treatment, however, people can recover from eating disorders.

Who is at risk for eating disorders?

Eating disorders can affect people of all ages, racial and ethnic backgrounds, body weights, and sexes. Even people who appear healthy can have eating disorders and be extremely ill. People with eating disorders can be underweight, average weight, or overweight.
The exact cause of eating disorders is not fully understood. Research suggests a combination of genetic, biological, behavioral, psychological, and social factors can raise a person's risk.

What are the common types of eating disorders?

Common types of eating disorders include:
Anorexia nervosa
: People with anorexia nervosa severely avoid or restrict food intake due to a distorted self-image or an intense fear of gaining weight. Even when dangerously underweight, they may see themselves as overweight. Some people with anorexia nervosa may also have binge eating and purging episodes.
Binge-eating disorder
: People with binge-eating disorder regularly lose control of their eating and eat unusually large amounts of food. People with binge-eating disorder are often overweight or obese.
Bulimia nervosa
: People with bulimia nervosa regularly binge eat and then engage in unhealthy behaviors to prevent weight gain, such as forced vomiting or the use of laxatives. People with bulimia nervosa may maintain an average weight or be overweight.
Avoidant restrictive food intake disorder (ARFID)
: People with ARFID limit the amount and variety of food they eat due to their anxiety or fear of the consequences of eating (such as choking or vomiting) or dislike of a food's characteristics (such as its appearance or texture). People with ARFID are frequently underweight.
People exhibiting any combination of these symptoms may have an eating disorder and should talk to a health care provider.

What are the signs and symptoms of anorexia nervosa?

Signs and symptoms of anorexia nervosa include:
Over time, anorexia nervosa can lead to numerous serious health consequences, including:
Extremely restricted eating
Intense and excessive exercise
Extreme thinness (emaciation)
A relentless pursuit of thinness and unwillingness to maintain a healthy weight
Intense fear of gaining weight
Distorted body image or self-image
Denial of the seriousness of low body weight
Thinning of the bones (osteopenia or osteoporosis)
Mild anemia
Muscle wasting and weakness
Delayed puberty
Severe constipation
Low blood pressure
Slowed breathing and pulse
Damage to the structure and function of the heart
Feeling tired all the time
Infertility
Brain damage
Multiple organ failure
Anorexia nervosa can be fatal.
It has an extremely high death rate compared with other mental disorders. People with anorexia nervosa are at risk of dying from medical complications associated with starvation. Suicide is a leading cause of death for people diagnosed with anorexia nervosa.
If you or someone you know is struggling or having thoughts of suicide, call or text the
988 Suicide and Crisis Lifeline
at
988
or chat at
988lifeline.org

. In life-threatening situations, call
911
.

What are the signs and symptoms of binge-eating disorder?

Signs and symptoms of binge-eating disorder include
:
Over time, binge eating can lead to serious health consequences, including
:
Eating unusually large amounts of food in a short amount of time, for example, within two hours
Eating rapidly during binge episodes
Eating even when full or not hungry
Eating until uncomfortably full
Eating alone or in secret to avoid embarrassment
Feeling distressed, ashamed, or guilty about eating
Dieting frequently, possibly without weight loss
Obesity
Type 2 diabetes
Cardiovascular problems
Sleep problems
Gastrointestinal symptoms (such as acid reflux, bloating, and diarrhea)

What are the signs and symptoms of bulimia nervosa?

The signs and symptoms of bulimia nervosa include the same signs and symptoms as binge eating. They also include the following, which aim to get rid of food after binge eating
:
Over time, bulimia nervosa can lead to serious health consequences, including:
Throwing up
Taking laxatives
Exercising excessively
Fasting
Chronically inflamed and sore throat
Swollen salivary glands in the neck and jaw area
Worn tooth enamel and increasingly sensitive and decaying teeth
Acid reflux disorder and other gastrointestinal problems
Intestinal distress and irritation
Severe dehydration
Electrolyte imbalance

What are the signs and symptoms of avoidant restrictive food intake disorder?

Signs and symptoms of ARFID include
:
Over time, ARFID can lead to serious health consequences, including:
Severe restriction of types or amount of food eaten
Lack of appetite or interest in food
Dramatic weight loss
Upset stomach, abdominal pain, or other gastrointestinal issues with no other known cause
Limited range of preferred foods that becomes even more limited ("picky eating" that gets progressively worse)
Unhealthy weight loss
Malnutrition
Changes to physical growth
Functional impairments associated with academic performance, work, and relationships

What mental illnesses can co-occur with eating disorders?

People with eating disorders are at risk for co-occurring mental illnesses, which most often include depression, anxiety, and substance use disorders. People with eating disorders are also at a higher risk for suicide. It's critical to treat any co-occurring conditions as part of the treatment plan.

How are eating disorders treated?

Eating disorders can be treated successfully. Early detection and treatment are important for recovery. Treatment plans for eating disorders include:
Individual, group, or family psychotherapy
to identify and change troubling emotions, thoughts, and behaviors about food. Learn more about
psychotherapy
.
Medical care and monitoring
to treat the health consequences of an eating disorder and monitor overall well-being.
Nutritional counseling
to help people eat well and reach and maintain a healthy weight.
Medication
to treat the symptoms of some eating disorders, including bulimia nervosa and binge-eating disorder, and to reduce symptoms of co-occurring anxiety or depression. There are currently no medications approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to treat the symptoms of anorexia nervosa or ARFID.
Some people with a severe eating disorder may need to be in a hospital or residential treatment program.
A person's family can play a crucial role in treatment. They can encourage a family member with eating or body image issues to seek help and can provide support during treatment. Research suggests that family-based treatment can improve eating disorder treatment outcomes, particularly for adolescents.

How can I find help?

If you have concerns about your eating behavior or mental health, talk to a primary care provider. They can refer you to a qualified mental health professional, such as a psychologist, psychiatrist, or clinical social worker, who can help you figure out the next steps. Find
tips for talking with a health care provider
about your mental health.
You can
learn more about getting help
on the NIMH website. You can also learn about
finding support
and
locating mental health services
in your area on the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) website.

What are clinical trials and why are they important?

Clinical trials are research studies that look at ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions. These studies help show whether a treatment is safe and effective in people. Some people join clinical trials to help doctors and researchers learn more about a disease and improve health care. Other people, such as those with health conditions, join to try treatments that aren't widely available.
NIMH supports clinical trials across the United States. Talk to a health care provider about clinical trials and whether one is right for you. Learn more about
participating in clinical trials
.

For more information

Learn more about
mental health disorders and topics
. For information about various health topics, visit the
National Library of Medicine's MedlinePlus resource.


Reprints

The information in this publication is in the public domain and may be reused or copied without permission. However, you may not reuse or copy images. Please
cite the National Institute of Mental Health
as the source.
Read our copyright policy
to learn more about our guidelines for reusing NIMH content.

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
National Institutes of Health
NIH Publication No. 24-MH-4901
Revised 2024